ARM based Kurobox Pro and Linkstation Pro/Live machines are similar
machines which primary use is as NAS devices or small home servers. They
are produced and selled for experienced GNU/Linux users. There are earlier
machines based on PowerPC but they are not supported.

The machines:

 - Kurobox Pro, has 256 MB MTD flash which stores the original firmware
 - Linkstation Live v1
 - Linkstation Live v2
 - Linkstation Pro v1
 - Linkstation Pro v2

From the point of view of debian-installer all of the machines above are
the same. The only difference is that Linkstation Pro/Live don't have any
onboard flash for storing the original firmware.

All the machines have:
 - an ARM based CPU (MHz can vary, but the same kernel works on all)
 - one network interface
 - DDR2 SDRAM
 - Flash ROM

Kurobox Pro and Linkstation Pro/Live v2 have additionally:
- 2 USB 2.0 ports
- SATA adapter for internal drive

Kurobox Pro additionally has a PCI-Express x1 bus and 256 MB NAND flash.

Boot procedure:

The Kurobox Pro defaults to boot from flash but the U-Boot bootloader
environment is changed, to boot from disk, via the config-debian script
before d-i starts. People who have installed FreeLink have already setup
their U-Boot environment to boot from disk.

Since Linkstation devices does not have any onboard flash the original
firmware is placed on the disk. The kernel and ramdisk are loaded from the
first partition on the disk, the files are called uImage.buffalo and
initrd.buffalo respectively.  Also, there is a kernel parameter
"initrd=..15M" that has to be removed for it to work with Debian ramdisks.

Buffalo firmware:

The original Buffalo firmware exists on MTD flash on the Kurobox Pro, on
the Linkstation Pro/Live the original firmware exists as a special pair of
kernel and ramdisk on hard drive. It is based on Busybox and has several
goodies in it. On both, the bootloader, U-Boot, exists on flash.

On the Linkstation the firmware is called EM, for Emergency Mode. When the
hard drive is removed from the Linkstation the device boots from TFTP.
The same applies to the Kurobox Pro.

U-Boot:

U-Boot is a nice bootloader, it is possible to connect to it with either a
serial console or netcat (newer versions only). There is good documentation
and upstream is active. It reads the configuration from its environment,
that resides on flash. The original Buffalo firmware has a tool called
`nvram' that can read and modify U-Boot's environment from the OS. Similar
tools are available in Debian in the package uboot-envtools.

When U-Boot boots from hard drive on these devices it can only load kernels
and ramdisks from an ext2 filesystem.

debian-installer: we support installations via SSH (the default) as well as
via the serial console. In the case of SSH, the password is either
preseeded or the default password 'install' is used.

